[<< Back to Epistemology](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/epistemology)

**RATIONALITY IN PRACTICE**

---

**Contents**:
- [Why read further?](#why-read-further)
- [The nature and importance of consistent rationality](#the-nature-and-importance-of-consistent-rationality)
- [Efficiency in effort is integral to rationality](#efficiency-in-effort-is-integral-to-rationality)
- [Rational application of volition](#rational-application-of-volition)
  - [Rational decision-making is always volitional](#rational-decision-making-is-always-volitional)
  - [Volition as a part of an integrated system](#volition-as-a-part-of-an-integrated-system)
  - [Essentialising focus](#essentialising-focus)
    - [PRINCIPLE 1: Non-contradiction in contexts](#principle-1-non-contradiction-in-contexts)
    - [PRINCIPLE 2: Seeking essentials vs. dismissing non-essentials](#principle-2-seeking-essentials-vs-dismissing-non-essentials)
    - [PRINCIPLE 3: Considerations in knowledge over considerations in ignorance](#principle-3-considerations-in-knowledge-over-considerations-in-ignorance)
    - [PRINCIPLE 4: Dismissing the practically unaccountable](#principle-4-dismissing-the-practically-unaccountable)
    - [Additional points](#additional-points)
      - [Dismissing arbitrary doubts and arbitrary hypotheticals](#dismissing-arbitrary-doubts-and-arbitrary-hypotheticals)
    - [Dismissing insignficant factors and risks](#dismissing-insignficant-factors-and-risks)
      - [Context-dropping when considering possibilities](#context-dropping-when-considering-possibilities)
  - [Shaping motivations](#shaping-motivations)

---

# Why read further?
By the nature of cognition beyond the perceptual level, the exercise of reason is non-automatic, thus involving self-driven effort. A context in which facts are to be studied is often complex, i.e. it involves many parts of reality which must be dealt with selective focus and rigorous integration by a finite consciousness; the integration here is both hierarchical (i.e. relationships between the concrete and the abstract) and contextual (i.e. relationships between different facts drawn from different parts of reality). Hence, we see that the exercise of reason, i.e. rationality is not necessarily easy; indeed, it is often complex and always needs rigour, i.e. focus and logic. Hence, we must ask: why bother with rationality in every waking moment? Why not be irrational once in a while, just to "relax and enjoy life"?

Here, we see a false and — in my view — dangerous dichotomy: consistent rationality that is a constant struggle vs. inconsistent rationality that leaves room for relaxation and the enjoyment of life. In the next section, I shall show that: (1) Consistent rationality is essentially a consistent value for one's own life in every sense, from the enjoyment of the moment to long-range success. (2) Consistent rationality is not and should not be a constant struggle; indeed, I want to show that a constant struggle in the pursuit of reason is precisely what is irrational. (3) The aforementioned dichotomy is harmful to one's life and one's pursuit of happiness. In the sections after the next, I shall present my understanding of how to practice rationality in various contexts, from the everyday to the long-range.

# The nature and importance of consistent rationality
The importance of consistent rationality is almost self-evident if you consider what rationality means. Rationality is, in essence, the act of staying in focus of reality as per your capacity and acting only on your grasp of reality. Note that every concept exists in a context; I shall make the context of the concept "rationality" clearer later. I say "later" because while theory is essential as it integrates concretes and helps us grasp their nature in a broader context, it would help us to grasp the context with some concretes first since concretes are the basis of any theory. Hence, consider: is it possible to rationally take your focus away from something? If you do so rationally, it means you act on your grasp of its unimportance or at least its _relative_ unimportance in your context. Also, consider: is it possible to rationally rest your mind, i.e. unfocus from reality for a while? It you do so rational, it means you act on your grasp of the value or even (if such is the case) the sheer importance of rest, and further, you act on your grasp of the fact that, in your knowledge, nothing more important needs your focus for a while.

To make my point clearer, consider: what is rationality apart from one's grasp of the facts? Nothing, as it is self-contradiction. Hence, in both cases, we see that it would evidently be irrational not to take your focus away from something or not to rest your mind if the facts you grasp are in favour of such action. Consider what would be the result of refusing to do so. Here are some stark examples: obsession over contamination (Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, i.e. OCD), fixation on arbitrary threats (e.g. paranoia, phobias, etc.), disproportionate concern for social approval or the avoidance of social disapproval (disproportionate with respect to one's hierarchy of values), disregard for physical health and well-being (e.g. sleep deprivation, which degrades the ability to focus, to regulate mood and, in general, to be rational), etc.

Taking support from the above discussion, I shall now expand more theoretically on the context of the concept "rationality". Note that since rationality is based on one's conscious grasp of the facts, and since an essential fact of consciousness is its finite capacity, relevance is integral to rationality. To disregard relevance while focusing on the facts is to disregard your grasp of what is or is not important within your context. In other words, to disregard relevance is irrational. The demand to "focus on the facts" cannot by itself be rational if it is out-of-context, i.e. isolated from the facts that give it meaning. The demand to "focus on the facts" exists and can exist only in the context of a variety of facts (especially facts related to consciousness), such as: (1) consciousness has a finite capacity, (2) consciousness exists integrated with the mind and the body as a part of an inseparable whole, (3) consciousness has needs in both the short-range and the long-range, (4) a conscious being can only act effectively within a hierarchy of values, etc. In short, rationality demands relevance, which means it demands selectivity in focus and effort.

Now, consider: what if you unfocus from reality without seeing if the facts that you grasp are in line with such action? Evidently, then, you have no grasp of the importance of what you are unfocusing from since you disregard it to begin with. Is such a policy in favour of your life? Can any person who wishes to stay in existence truly rest knowing he is evading the reality in front of him? Can he truly rest assured by essentially burying his head in the sand while it is self-evident to his mind that doing so would not make what is real in front of him unreal? Moreover, can any person who wishes to stay in existence truly find enjoyment in the moment if he — as a policy — refuses to see what is important to his life as well as his enjoyment of it? Even if a person focuses on and acts according to reality but only time-to-time, he cannot but internalise a disregard for reality as such by the nature of his policy. In essence, it is like driving drunk or walking unarmed into a jungle: you might be alright in the end, but you have devalued your life and its potential and would likely degrade or destroy it by your own choices.

Consistently being rational is, in essence, consistently valuing your own life. Now, note that to value your life inconsistently as a policy is a self-contradiction: life is an integrated whole and no part of it exists in isolation, which means to actively devalue parts of it would be to actively devalue the whole of it. In other words, you cannot value your life if you devalue it as a policy. Hence, either you are consistently rational and thereby value your life, or you are inconsistently rational and thereby devalue your life, be it actively or passively. In the second case, there are two options: (1) You are inconsistently rational as a fault rather than a policy, in which case such inconsistency is necessarily a transition either from fault to virtue or from fault to vice. (2) You are inconsistently rational as a policy, in which case you do not and cannot value your life as such. Of course, man has free will, which means neither virtue nor vice are fixed states of existence, but as long as he chooses to stay in vice, he cannot value his life as such.

As a cap on the discussion so far, consider the sheer contradiction in the idea that "some irrationality" is "acceptable" or "necessary". If "acceptability" or "necessity" is based on the facts of reality, then the idea amounts to the contradictory statement: "some irrationality is rational". To make the contradiction clearer, consider what it means: "to think and act with disregard for some relevant facts is to think and act with regard for all relevant facts." Needless to say, to the extent you disregard the relevant facts, to that extent you are irrational and certainly not rational at the same time. Moreover, to the extent that you are irrational, to that extent you disregard your life and its potential; even doing so only time-to-time but as a policy is sheer irrationality. To put it briefly, rationality permits no compromise with irrationality.

---

**NOTE 1**: To say "relevant facts" in the above paragraph is redundant, because as we have seen, to regard facts as a whole is to regard them in the context of the nature and finite capacity of consciousness, which necessarily implies the regard of facts by relevance, since to disregard relevance is to disregard the facts that give rise to cognition in the first place. Nonetheless, I have said "relevant facts" for clarity's sake.

**NOTE 2**: When I say "relevant facts", I mean relevant facts within the context of your capacity in the given situation. I take this context as a given, seeing how relevance has been defined and what the need for relevance is.

**NOTE 3**: To re-emphasise the key point, rationality is indispensable to one's efficacy in life: rationality as a consistent practice is the most effective way to deal with reality as a whole since rationality is the fundamental basis of long-range efficacy in life. Here, note that the long-range does not exist apart from the short-range and necessarily integrates it in some way. Hence, in essence, being rational is the only effective way to deal with reality.

# Efficiency in effort is integral to rationality
We have seen above that rationality demands relevance, which means it demands selectivity in focus and effort. Now, I shall look at a related aspect of rationality in practice, namely the need for efficiency, whose basis is the same as the basis of the need for relevance: the fact that consciousness is finite. We start by grasping what the use of reason must ultimately be based on. The use of reason is the use of one's faculty of identifying and integrating the material provided by one's direct awareness of reality. Since reality is integrated by identity and causality, the use of reason must ultimately be based on the broadest context we can grasp, i.e. the context of our life as a whole, i.e. life lived long-range.

Hence, rationality does not demand that we subject ourselves to a constant, excruciating effort in every moment of our life to perceive every detail we can so as to work our minds to analyse as many integrations as possible of what we perceive; such would be an irrational use of one's mind since it would degrade and ultimately destroy our ability to deal with life in a broader context, because consciousness is finite, the energy needed to use it is finite (though renewable), values are time-bound and their achievement is conditional. Moreover, since contexts are integrated in a non-contradictory whole, such an irrational use of one's mind would also degrade and ultimately destroy our ability to deal with particulars beyond short-range reactions.

Hence, the most scrupulous use of one's reason demands not a constant, excruciating effort to focus on every detail but the _sustainable_, i.e. _efficient_ and _long-range_ application of our volition, which can be painstaking or even excruciating but only when needed, which would not and should not be in one's every waking moment. Integrating our knowledge of reality does not involve agonising over every particular but recognising the _essential_ truths that form the basis of the context and the _relevant_ possible paths we may take. The scrupulous use of one's reason consists not of adding burdens to one's mind but of enabling and advancing the pursuit of one's own life and happiness; such a pursuit, of course, is profoundly rational.

Volition — and by extension reason — has to be selective, since the mind's capacity is finite while the needs of one's life are time-bound and conditional. Hence, rationality demands that we understand that which is most _relevant_, i.e. significant within our knowledge in the pursuit of our life and happiness. We cannot and should not try to know or do everything, not because of passivity but necessity; we must not disregard what is most important in our context, which means that given the finite capacity of the mind, we must disregard much of what is less important. _To put it starkly, to place the arbitrary and the less important over what you know to be relevant and more important is profoundly irrational._ However, note that the use of reason is always absolute; we can and must use reason even to understand why and in what way to trust others or to leave concerns unattended.

**NOTE**: _One of the essentials in the pursuit of values is the affirmation of life in the moment, i.e. the concrete experience of values in the here and now_ (see: ["The basis of motivation" from _Integrating the Actual and the Potential_ from _Philosophy in Practice_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/philosophy-in-practice/2-integrating-actual-and-potential.html#the-basis-of-motivation-and-willpower)). _This requires engagement with the present, either as pleasure or enjoyment in the moment or other kinds of focus or engagement. Hence, note that to keep taking away one's engagement from the moment for some deliberation without a clear reason arising is irrational._

_Given that rationality demands efficiency, how to actually be efficient in our volitional effort? In other words, what constitutes the rational application of volition? This is our next topic._

# Rational application of volition
## Rational decision-making is always volitional
With the right principles, methods and practice, rational decision-making can be greatly facilitated and become second nature, but it can never be automatic, no matter how much and how well you integrate your premises, your knowledge, your thoughts, your motives and your actions. Why? Because even after integrating, the fact remains that no non-self-evident knowledge is automatic. Note also that instinct and intuition, while invaluable, are also not automatically valid, especially not by default; you still need to validate whether they are applicable in the given context. Furthermore, the facts remains that (1) focus is still finite and (2) the right adherence to the facts and the right application of one's mental contents with respect to the given context are still not automatic, since they still require you to bring to focus the facts and the right parts of your mental contents with respect to the facts. Finally, the effort to apply one's knowledge through action also requires a conscious decision, since the application itself is not automatic and does not lead to an automatic action. Hence, while decision-making can get smoother and more efficient, it is never wholly automatic and certainly not automatic by default and in the long-range.

**NOTE**: _You can automate parts of decision-making as appropriate, but to know whether it is appropriate to do so also requires deliberate focus._

## Volition as a part of an integrated system
Your volitional faculty does not exist in isolation; it is integrated into your mind and body and everything they involve. Everything is relevant to the use of your volition; the conscious and the subconscious, the mental and the physical. Now, note that you can always make some choice, perhaps not any given choice but at least some choice from what is available (available according to your context). What is available is conditioned by many factors — most relevant being internal factors — and thus, so is your capacity to use your volition. Hence, to use your volition effectively, consider such factors and consider how you may apply your volition such that your choices support the pursuit of your values to the fullest (in terms of both the actual and the potential, needless to say).

## Essentialising focus
**KEY POINT 1**:

_Consciousness has an identity and is finite in scope and capacity._

This is the first important fact to consider when learning to use one's mind. The definite nature and the finiteness of one's mental and thus volitional mechanism imply that to use one's mind effectively, i.e. rationally, one must use it as efficiently as possible (of course, efficiency properly understood implies no cost to overall efficacy and only leads to its improvement). Hence, the primary method of using one's mind is unit reduction, i.e. the process of reducing the number of conscious units held in one's mind while retaining the whole relevant context of information; this may involve omitting many non-essential details (non-essential with respect to one's context). Hence, we get...

**KEY POINT 2**:

_Unit reduction expands the scope of one's consciousness._

**NOTE**: _Unit-reduction does not preclude the consideration of concretes (of course, since concretes are the basis of knowledge). On the contrary, concretes are most efficaciously handled when using unit-reduction. Where more concrete consideration is needed, such must be done, and where broader abstractions are more relevant, such must be done, but it is unit-reduction that gives you the capacity to understand what approach is relevant in the given context._

Now, let us ask: why is it necessary to think in essentials? Focus and effort are precious and finite resources (though renewable): every bit of focus and effort in thought and action must be applied based only on what you know to be rational and purposeful in your context (exploration of unknowns can and must be rational and purposeful too; even curiosity-based or relatively random exploration can and must have rational grounds. See: [_Exploration in Truth-seeking_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/epistemology/exploration-in-truth-seeking.html)). It is constructive to note that here, unit-reduction by forming broad abstractions is vital in achieving intellectual, moral and practical efficacy. To effectively deal with particulars, it is necessary to (1) identify particular instances of abstract values, (2) judge them based on the abstractions and (3) not delve deeper into the particulars themselves without reason or purpose relevant to the context. The most effective method of unit-reduction is thinking in essentials. Note that what constitutes the essentials depends on the context, i.e. we must find what constitutes the primary or fundamental elements in the given context. Thinking in essentials is the indispensable method of defining and retaining a whole context. Hence, we get...

**KEY POINT 3**:

_To handle concretes efficiently requires thinking in essentials._

---

**NOTE: Importance of abstraction**:

Firstly, only by abstracting (i.e. selectively focusing on and isolating certain aspects that are metaphysically inseparable) can we grasp the underlying similarities between distinct particulars, especially when they have no apparent or perceptually obvious similarities. Secondly, only through abstractions can we mentally separate and thereby grasp more essential characteristics whose existence necessarily implies the existence of a number of other characteristics. In this way, we can grasp the most relevant causal factors in the behaviour or nature of something with much fewer conscious units, and thus, with fewer mental resources.

**NOTE: Validity of abstractions and essentials**:

_To see why abstraction in general and essentials in particular are objective and effective, check_ [_Integration of Perception_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/epistemology/4-integration-of-perception.html#).

Since volition is essentially the ability to focus selectively, the rational use of volition requires the rational use of focus, which requires thinking in essentials. In other words, the focus of our minds must be on that which is essential in the given context. We expand into particulars as indicated by the context, progressively expanding the scope of our focus, but always with the method of thinking in essentials. The question now is: how to recognise and focus on essentials in a given context?

### PRINCIPLE 1: Non-contradiction in contexts
_This reinforces the idea in_ ["Hierarchical and contextual organisation of values" from _Integrating the Actual and the Potential_ from _Philosophy in Practice_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/philosophy-in-practice/2-integrating-actual-and-potential.html#hierarchical-and-contextual-organisation-of-values).

Essentials in a narrower context cannot contradict those in a broader context that subsumes it. A broader context — being more abstracted and integrated — would involve fewer but more wide-ranging essentials. Hence, this principle of non-contradiction means we can keep in mind the essentials of a broader context by reference to which we can identify and/or eliminate many potential essentials in a narrower context.

**NOTE**: _Elements of a broader context can have various specific or concrete expressions in narrower contexts; even so, non-contradiction is maintained, wherein none of the different expressions contradict the overarching elements in the broader context._

### PRINCIPLE 2: Seeking essentials vs. dismissing non-essentials
The act of staying in focus is the act of grasping what is, rather than what is not. The reason is clear: what is not can only be grasped (if at all) with respect to what is. Extending the same principle to any act and result of selective focus, we see that seeking the essentials is the act of staying in focus to grasp what is, i.e. what exists, what knowledge exists about what exists, and what we know about what relates to our purpose and to what extent.

Focusing on the non-essential apart from one's pursuit of the essentials is to reject your grasp of reality in favour of the unreal (e.g. either that which does not exist or that which has no existing relationship within your knowledge to what is relevant in your context). Doing so is essentially an act of turning away from reality, which can never reach the efficacy of turning to reality except by accident; hence, it can ever be a valid policy. Furthermore, the more focus on the non-essentials, the more you turn away from dealing with reality and learning more about it, since learning can only happen with respect to what you know and not apart from it. Moreover, turning away from reality means your awareness is less capable or incapable of learning more about what could potentially turn out to be essential.

To conclude, the right approach to dealing with reality is not to go over and keep dismissing the non-essentials but rather to seek the essentials and expand your focus based on what you know and what comes into your awareness (which you must keep keen and ready, which is only possible if you keep your focus clear, which in turn is only possible by keeping the essentials in sight and not delving unnecessarily into the non-essentials). Hence, focus on seeking the essentials rather than dismissing the non-essentials. Even logistically, the former approach is the efficient and effective approach in practice while the latter approach tends to proliferate arbitrary concerns and can do so far beyond what can practically be dealt with (since the realm of the arbitrary is always infinite while the realm of knowledge is always finite at any given point).

**NOTE**: _Dismissing non-essentials is a valid approach but only as secondary to seeking the essentials. In other words, if you have reason to consider something as potentially essential and relevant for the given context and purpose, then it is valid to check it is indeed so or if it is a non-essential to be dismissed._

### PRINCIPLE 3: Considerations in knowledge over considerations in ignorance
Awareness is always awareness of what is. Even if you are aware of what is not, it is always with respect to what is. Knowledge is the retained awareness of reality. To consider something in knowledge is to keep one's awareness on reality. To consider something in ignorance is either (1) the rejection of one's awareness of reality (including the rejection of what is relevant and/or essential) or (2) the consideration in knowledge of a potential. In case (1), you ultimately act without cognitive purpose and thereby ultimately do not choose to think, to be aware and to value your existence. In case (2), the consideration is still consideration in knowledge.

For example, if your purpose is to discover the cause of an engine failure, the search for the cause is always with respect to your knowledge of the factors affecting the engine's functions and your knowledge of the fact that you must explore to discover the responsible factors and thereby achieve your purpose. In other words, a cognitively purposeful consideration in ignorance presupposes consideration in knowledge.

Hence, it is clear that considerations in ignorance must never be prioritised over considerations in knowledge. If you know X but do not know about Y, then your actions must be taken with respect to what you know about X and not with respect to what you do not know about Y. For example, when considering the potential contamination of the food you intend to eat, if you have reason to trust it (e.g. reliability of the source, viable ingredients, no evidence for serious contamination, etc.), then you do not act on what you do not know (e.g. the effect of unknown and unobserved pathogens, hypothetical scenarios by which contamination could have occurred, etc.). To expand on the example in another direction, suppose there is a food-related epidemic that is known to affect your area. In such a case, you have reason to seek further evidence for the safety of the food where possible, since you have knowledge of the widespread and dangerous nature of the epidemic. Hence, when you decide not to each something because you do not know whether it has been decontaminated appropriately, you decide it based on your knowledge of the epidemic and thus the relevance of decontamination. Hence, we see that considerations must always be rooted in knowledge and never be primarily in ignorance.

Consider the case where considerations in ignorance are given primacy. Stark examples of the dysfunctional results are: paranoia, obsessive compulsive disorder, unmanageable anxiety and/or panic, etc. Considerations primarily rooted in ignorance lead to dysfunction precisely because they are rooted in the lack of awareness, i.e. they are detached from reality and may only turn out to be valid on sheer accident.

_To summarise_...

All rational consideration is and must be primarily consideration in knowledge.

### PRINCIPLE 4: Dismissing the practically unaccountable
The basic statement of the principle is:

"What cannot be taken into account must not be taken into account."

If it cannot be taken into account, then no mental effort toward it has purpose, which means it has no relevance in the given context. Rationality demands relevance, hence the aforementioned principle. To expand on the principle, something cannot be taken into account if (1) it violates the contraints (of time, effort or resources) with respect to one's hierarchy of values or (2) it is based on considerations that have no basis in knowledge, i.e. it is based on considerations primarily in ignorance. In case (1), putting time, effort and resources to try to account for something that takes away time, effort and resources from something known to be more relevant is acting against one's awareness of reality, i.e. acting primarily in ignorance. In case (2), it is more obvious that the action taken would be primarily in ignorance. In both cases, one's indifference to reality is stronger than one's affirmation of it, leading to an approach that ultimately denies one's awareness and thereby one's existence.

**NOTE**: _It is clear that this principle is essentially an extension of principle 3._

### Additional points
#### Dismissing arbitrary doubts and arbitrary hypotheticals
By principles 3 and 4, arbitrary doubts and arbitrary hypotheticals are based primarily in ignorance and cannot be accounted for.

### Dismissing insignficant factors and risks
By principles 4, insigificant factors and risks cannot be accounted for, especially with respect to one's knowledge of the essentials and one's hierarchy of values.

#### Context-dropping when considering possibilities
A claim of possibility, like all knowledge claims, is contextual, i.e. based on a certain set of necessary and/or sufficient conditions. For example, if I say, "It is possible for a man to kill a tiger," what I am really saying is, "A man can kill a tiger under certain necessary and/or sufficient conditions, e.g. if the man is able-bodied enough and/or if the man is armed and ready and/or if the tiger is weak enough, etc." It is invalid for me to go up to a crippled old man and tell him that he can kill a rampaging tiger because it is "possible for a man to kill a tiger." As another example, if I say, "It is possible for me to get infected by contact with outdoor surfaces," implicit in my statement are conditions (e.g. infected people coming into contact with the surface, the infection being transmissible through the skin, etc.), of which only the conditions I can actually account for are relevant to consider.

## Shaping motivations
_This is lifted from_ ["Further points on motivation" from _Integrating the Actual and the Potential_ from _Philosophy in Practice_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/philosophy-in-practice/2-integrating-actual-and-potential.html#further-points-on-motivation).

Motivation has both an intellectual (abstract) and a psychological (concrete) aspect. Both are vital and must be integrated (at least over time); the abstract aspect integrates the relevant concretes and validates motivations in the right context, whereas the concrete aspect is what ultimately drives your actions. However, the concrete, i.e. psychological aspect is largely subconscious; the abstract, i.e. intellectual aspect is key in shaping the psychological aspect, but such shaping must be done logically (remember the analogy of a programmer — the intellectual aspect — and the computer — the psychological aspect). Thus, shaping your motivations may often be a matter of a more tactful, indirect approach rather than direct intent or willpower, especially in view of the complexity of your goals and of your means to achieve them.

_Motivation and willpower are explored in-depth in_ ["Integrating the actual and the potential" from _Philosophy in Practice_](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/philosophy-in-practice/2-integrating-actual-and-potential.html).