As examples of the use of other faculties as an application of reason, consider: (1) In an emergency, it is rational to use instincts to act if it is clear that any deliberation is practically impossible or potentially detrimental to your ability to deal with the emergency. (2) In the pursuit of pleasure in the moment, it is rational to act on emotion within the context if doing otherwise would take away from the pleasure you rationally decided to seek.

# Are wild animals more rational than human beings?
Let me first define my terms. Reason is the faculty of identifying and integrating the material given by direct experience; “integrating” is the key word, since that takes us from direct perception and instinct (which are immediate or short-range) to deeper, broader and more long-range understanding of the world (via abstraction, concepts and generalisations). Integration is what separates reason from mere perception and mere instinct (I say “mere” because (1) reason is based on direct perception but extends beyond it and (2) reason can integrate instinct but, of course, it has a lot more to it).

Now, integration beyond perception and basic concepts is not automatic and needs selective, self-directed focus, i.e. volition. Most wild animals are instinctual and short-range; most do not possess the power of volition (though I think some may possess it). We humans do possess it, which is why humans can be rational while most animals cannot. But note that volition is not automatic, which means rationality is not automatic; we must choose to be rational, but we can also choose otherwise (and many do). But it is the capacity for reason that separates us from other (or at least most other) animals, hence my previous comment (which was maybe a bit oversimplified). But note that irrationality can only be identified as the negation of rationality, which means rationality is causally and conceptually prior; in other words, irrationality is the failure to use the distinctively human capacity to reason. That's why I hold the capacity to be rational as the essence of being human rather than the capacity to be irrational.

As for humans doing many things not contributing to survival, we have to note two things: (1) Humans are volitional beings, which means they can only function as volitional beings by integrating the actual with the potential (i.e. by being long-range in some way). Hence, our needs for survival as volitional beings are much more complex than mere biological needs. Take some examples. Art is a need of our consciousness to be able to concretise and reinforce our broad view of the world and of life. Enjoyment is a vital need since it concretises our value for life in the moment. Curiosity and the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake are tied to long-range survival (if pursued rationally), since dealing with a broader more long-range context needs at least some exploration beyond what we know to be relevant. (2) Humans can choose to be irrational, which means they can refuse to integrate their values, motives and actions toward their long-range survival. Such people would indeed do a lot of things that don’t make sense and that don’t contribute to their survival, but such a state of affairs is not inherent in being human. If it interests you, check out my article on the nature of life, especially for a human being (free to comment under the blog post as well, if you want):
https://pranigopu.wordpress.com/2024/05/22/the-nature-of-life/