[<< Back to Politics](https://pranigopu.github.io/philosophy/politics)

**A CASE FOR CAPITALISM**

---

**Contents**:

- [The importance of economics](#the-importance-of-economics)
- [The importance of property](#the-importance-of-property)
- [The basis of value-exchange](#the-basis-of-value-exchange)
- [The right economic system](#the-right-economic-system)

---

# The importance of economics
Economics refers to the realm of human activity that concerns the creation and exchange of concrete values (a person’s concrete values are the concretes that a person acts to gain and/or keep). In other words, it concerns the creation and exchange of wealth in various forms, e.g. goods, services, assets, capital, money, etc. Hence, economics is one of the most important realms of activity within which a person concretises, i.e. realises or materialises his pursuit of value or — in more concrete terms — his pursuit of happiness.

# The importance of property
Morally, an individual is an end in himself, i.e. his moral standard is his own life and his primary moral obligation is the pursuit of his own happiness. In order to create, use and — if needed — dispose of the values he needs to sustain his life, he must have the moral right to the concretes he needs to use to pursue his values and to the values he creates. A “right” in this context is a freedom of action that is morally sanctioned in a social context — note that a social context is relevant here, since no question of sanction is raised outside a social context (_though morality is always relevant to an individual within or without a social context_). The right to the resources for and result of one’s pursuit of value is the right to property.

It is important to note that, as all principles — which includes rights — the right to property is non-contradictory; you cannot accept the right to property without also accepting its necessary implications. Examples of such implications include: profit, inheritance, passive (i.e. non-productive) ownership, etc. Each of the implications deserves its own discussion, which I shall not get into right now. However, to set the stage for our next topic, consider an example in the case of profit. I posit that if a man owns the resources for an enterprise and wishes to buy the voluntary labour of other men for an agreed-upon price, the products of his enterprise — apart from what was agreed to be paid for the labour — are his by right, since it is the result of his resources and his pursuit of his values; in other words, he has the right to the profits of his enterprise apart from the cost of labour. As for the workers, their resources are their own labour and the material they do not own, while the result of their pursuit of value is the price for their labour that was agreed upon. However, given that “voluntary agreement” is given such importance, we must raise another question: what is the basis by which people must exchange values and where — if anywhere — does voluntary agreement come into the picture?

# The basis of value-exchange
_In broad terms, value-exchange refers to the transfer of concrete values from the possession of one individual to another. As such, value-exchange is not necessarily morally sanctioned, which means we must identify the conditions in which it is._

If an individual has the right to the resources for and results of his pursuit of value, no one else has the right to what is his other than what he chooses to give; his choice is the only basis by which others can have any right to what is his, since his property is only his to dispose of as he sees fit. The implication is that the conditions under which an individual agrees to give others the right to any part of his property is the relevant factor in deciding who has what rights regarding the results of the use of his property or former property.

The most direct example of value-exchange is trade, wherein each party agrees to give up his claim over some part of his property to the other in exchange for the claim over some part of the other’s property. A less direct example is that of employment, wherein one party agrees to lend his labour in exchange for a share (which may be a fixed amount or a proportion) of the results of the use of the other’s property. Here, we see the vital importance of agreement and — by extension — contracts; in the context of value-exchange, only the honouring of an agreement maintains one’s right to property. A contract is essentially an agreement enforced by law; such an enforcement is not a violation but in fact the only means to protect an individual against the violation of his property.

Hence, we see the rise of two key aspects of morally sanctioned value-exchange: (1) voluntary agreement and (2) the enforcement of contracts. The implication of voluntary agreement is free trade in every respect, from the exchange of goods and services to the exchange of voluntary labour for payment. The implication of the enforcement of contracts is that a key part of facilitating voluntary exchange is ensuring the respect for an agreement in the long-term. Of course, since the sole purpose of a contract is to safeguard the voluntary exchange of value, an agreement by all parties involved to change or cancel the contract must also be respected. The principle that integrates these aspects is individual freedom (i.e. the right to act according to one’s own judgement, provided it does not violate the rights of others), which implies the respect for volition in human interactions and relationships. In other words, the only moral basis for value-exchange and — by extension — value-distribution is the principle of individual freedom. Furthermore, to restrict morally sanctioned value-exchange is to restrict individual freedom, and hence, such a restriction is also a violation of individual rights. Hence, morally, individuals must be free to exchange values under the principle of individual freedom.

# The right economic system
Given that the right to property is fundamental and given that free trade and agreement — including contractual agreement — is the moral right of any individual, the only moral system is one that sanctions and protects both of these rights. The name given to such a system is laissez-faire capitalism. The particular methods of implementing such a system can vary, but three principles are constant: the right to property, the right to free trade and the enforcement of contracts. I want to stress that no individual rights are possible without the right to property, since property is the means by which an individual can seek, use and dispose of his values as he sees fit, i.e. it is the basis of his right to own life and thus his individual freedom in practice.

As may already be apparent, an economic system rests on a political system, which means laissez-faire capitalism defines not only the principles of economics but also the principles of governance (i.e. politics). In particular, it defines the overriding obligation of the government to be the protection of individual rights; after all, it is only by the protection of individual rights that the right to property, free trade, etc. can be protected logically and legally, especially long-range. Laissez-faire capitalism defines the government’s role not as a ruler but as a servant. Crucially, it also defines that there must be a separation of state and economics.
