[<< Back to Literature](https://pranigopu.github.io/art/literature)

**THE DEAREST GIFT**

“Is that me, Kaspar?” Savitri asked, her eyes open wide at the sharp, stark form realised with sure and steady strokes. He nodded, not lifting his eyes off the paper and not ceasing the work of his pen. “I’m not that beautiful, you dreamer,” she said smiling, almost breaking into a laugh. As he went on drawing, he replied, “That’s only because I’ve swept away everything but the essence, your essence.” <br>
“Why? Is there so much of me you’d rather not have?” <br>
He put his pen down and looked up to her, into her eyes, eyes dark as the deepest of chasms yet radiant as the naked summer sun. He lifted his hand to touch her face, the face of the serene dusk and the hopeful dawn, decorated with the pearls he had given her, pearls that were as good as dust if not worn by her. <br>
“I want all that you are and all that you could be,” he replied, “But, you see, all that is tied together — made true — by this,” he said.

She sat beside him, looking into his eyes as deeply as he looked into hers. She drew in a breath of desire at those browns of the rich earth after rain. She gazed at the face sculpted by a thousand conquests and by a hunger for a thousand more, conquests not of men but of nature, his own and that of the world around him. A hint of a smile played on her lips, like a flower in the wind. As if to catch it, he took her in his arms and held his face over hers; their lips yearned for each other until they yearned no more.

The only way to bring new life was to make the act life-affirming, nature must have rightly thought — if nature could think. But soon, in the hands of beings alive, aware and in love with the fact that they were, the act became something purer, more selfishly grand, a grandeur that was at once never meant to be and always meant to be; never meant to be for those who played in the lap of fate, yet always meant to be for those who saw fate in the eye as they held it in their hands, not as gods but as mortals, mortals whom fate could destroy but never defeat.

Each one decided to give the other what — by the nature of life — only they could give, each for their own sake and nothing else. He held her ever closer as she cried out, crying for release yet trying, trying with all that she had to hold on to the moment, a moment stretched into a sharp, stark form realised with sure and steady strokes. He held her face as she held his, so hungry yet so replete, a fire in their eyes at the core of which was a serenity that nothing could touch, the serenity of knowing that the world was theirs to have.